DocOps: Adopting a self-service model for managing documentation-specific operational workflows
When I first joined Magento, the Documentation team depended on an understaffed DevOps team to manage disparate continuous integration and continuous delivery (CI/CD) systems for all documentation web sites (i.e., four sites total). Not only was this inefficient when the team needed to monitor CI/CD health, make minor adjustments to processes, and manage technical dependencies, but it also prevented the team from pursuing special projects to improve documentation quality and user experience. 

As a Documentation team, we needed the ability to easily—and independently—customize, monitor, and troubleshoot the development and publication process (DocOps) for all of our web sites using a unified CI/CD system. I didn't invent the term "DocOps", but I think it connotes all of the technical tasks associated with producing technical documentation aside from the act of writing.

Taking ownership
DocOps can be an intimidating concept for some Documentation teams because it 1) implies team ownership of technical systems and 2) requires team members to have skills that go beyond most conventional technical writing roles, such as scripting, security, and IT management. I advocated for owning our DocOps process because I instinctively knew that it would give our team much more control over driving operational efficiencies and leveraging automation to innovate on our product documentation.

Building something new
Prior to joining Magento, I had designed and implemented a DocOps process at Affinipay. Although the Magento team's DocOps needs were radically different, I was confident that I could design something suitable based on my experience. After identifying the need to be self-sufficient and explaining the benefits to my manager, I began gathering requirements to replace our existing CI/CD system and hosting solution with infrastructure that the Documentation team would own and maintain.

I planned three phases to adopt our new DocOps process. Phase one included setting up new static site hosting environments for all sites using AWS S3 and writing pipeline scripts to build and deploy each documentation site to different environments (based on webhooks and on demand). Phase two included writing pipeline scripts to reindex site search records on a regular schedule and validate pull requests (e.g., test internal links and lint markdown syntax). Phase three included writing pipeline scripts that would actually test a subset of the installation, configuration, and upgrade procedures that we have documented on one of our sites.

Overcoming challenges
Implementing a new DocOps process presented some unique challenges. Overcoming these challenges required a positive attitude, patience, and perseverance.

The Documentation team was unaccustomed to basic DocOps principles, including branch protection rules in GitHub, validating internal links, and markdown linting. Some team members voiced concern that implementing the new rules would reduce team velocity at the expense of negligible value to the customer. After implementing a simple open source link checker and markdown linter on our largest site, I was able to show the team how much these seemingly small issues were impacting the quality of documentation. We had over 500 broken internal links and even more linting errors. Admittedly, not all linting errors posed quality issues. However, the biggest linting issue impacting quality was specific to the nesting of ordered and unordered lists. The amount of inconsistency in spacing and indentation was causing prolific misalignment in lists throughout the documentation; making it difficult to follow. Enforcing consistency with linting rules and automated checks eliminated those problems.

My first attempt at building a DocOps solution using a Jenkins server was unsuccessful. It required the assistance of a DevOps resource for initial provisioning. The DevOps resource who provisioned the server and gave writers access did not fulfill the basic Jenkins configuration requirements that I requested. The result was a server and staging environment that did not fully meet the team's needs and wasn't well understood by the rest of the DevOps team. Specifically, we were unable to deploy multiple branches to staging environments concurrently, nor could we convert the freestyle Jenkins jobs that the DevOps resource created to a more flexible pipeline script that we could maintain as code. I shared this feedback with the DevOps resource and the DevOps Manager, but they declined to make modifications. Shortly after this feedback, the DevOps resource that I was working with left the company and the DevOps Manager suggested I explore using AWS CodeBuild instead.

My second attempt at building a DocOps solution using AWS CodeBuild was partially successful. I built a functioning prototype using my personal AWS account, but after presenting it to the DevOps Manager for next steps on provisioning the necessary corporate AWS account to move forward, I was informed that DevOps would not be able to support my efforts and that I'd need to work with Adobe IT to provision a Jenkins server. Incidentally, this happened right as Adobe was completing its acquisition of Magento.

My third attempt at building a DocOps solution using Adobe's self-service Jenkins provisioning infrastructure was successful. I had accumulated a lot Magento-specific automation experience and knowledge from my previous attempts. By the time I finally had a basic Jenkins server up and running and was able to start writing pipeline scripts, personally, I was able to make significant progress in replacing our existing systems and switching each site over to the new system.

Measuring the outcome
The primary motivation for implementing a new Magento DocOps process was to empower the team to pursue special projects that improved documentation quality and user experience. To determine whether we were successful with those improvements, I created a Net Promoter Score (NPS) survey on our sites at the beginning of the project so that we would have a pre-implementation score to compare with a post-implementation score.

It's difficult to be sure, but I believe that adding test coverage for installation, configuration, and upgrade documentation, enforcing markdown linting rules for presentation issues, validating internal links, and automating search indexing was responsible for increasing the Net Promoter Score (NPS) on our sites from -10 to +6 in six months. In hindsight, I should've spent more time identifying success metrics at the beginning of the project, but that's a lesson of which I'm mindful for every new documentation project that I approach.